Governance
Isn’t easy to define in a simple definition

#1 World Bank definition
The manner in which power is exercised/ applied in the management of a country’s economic and social resources for development

#2 WorldWide Governance Indicators
The traditions and institutions by which authority in a country is exercised


Institutions
Definition by Douglas North:

“Institutions are the rules of the game in a society, more formally, are the humanly devised constraints that shape human interaction”

Rules of the game are the constraints of human behavior
The major effect will be through incentives
human control framework which differs from geographic or other fundamental causes


How we measure governance
World Bank WorldWide Governance Indicators : WGI project

WGI reports individual and aggregate indicators for about 200 economies (96-18), and has six dimensions of governance.

Voice and Accountability
Political Stability or Absence of Violence
Government effectiveness
Regulatory Quality
Rule of law
Control of corruption

The indicators are the view of entreprises, citizens, expert surveys in industrial and developing countries. Based on 30 different sources, think tanks, NGO’s, private sector etc




Global Integrity
It is an Index that measures corruption in 31 countries by looking at the opposite of corruption. There are three main concepts:
Public integrity mechanisms
Effectiveness
Access from citizens to those mechanisms

There are 6 categories:
Non governmental organizations
Elections
Government conflicts
Public administration
Government oversight
Anti-corruption Legal framework

The three stage procedure :
A journalist analyzed qualitatively the culture of corruption and state of governance
A researcher aggregates around 300 indicators per country and assign scores
Two national and one international expert blindly peer review the data


Common Limits to governance Indicators
Not enough countries + Problem of translating qualitative data…


Afrobarometer
Pan african non partisan survey research project that measures citizen attitudes on democracy and governance.

Objectives: Produce reliable data, strengthen the capacity of African institutions, disseminate and apply democratic governance survey results.

Conclusion: Still difficulty to measure accurately governance + Problem of normativity (corruption)

Main Takeaways
There are different levels of indicators that have different purposes
There is no perfect indicator, there is always a trade-off
There is an importance of long term use of more specific indicators


Social Spending

Public Social Spending , there are three types:
Social Protection
Social insurance
Social assistance
Education Services
Health Services

Social spending can help build human capital, promote equity and raise growth potential


Social Spending: Does governance matter ?
Conclusions of the paper:

Differences in the efficacy of public spending can be largely explained by the quality of governance

Public health spending lowers child mortality rates more in countries with good governance

Similarly, public spending on primary education becomes more effective in increasing primary education attainment in countries with good governance

More generally, public spending has virtually no impact on health and education outcomes in poorly governed countries, whereas, there is a positive impact of public spending in countries with good governance.


Dreher et al. (2008) found that additional education spending in developing and middle-income countries contribute very less to improvement in education outcomes.

Filmer and Pritchett (1999) found no effect of public health spending on child mortality. They argue that inadequate institutional capacity and market failures are behind the weak link between health spending and improvements in health status.



Aid and Governance
It is the assistance governments, non government organisations, business and individuals of one country give to the people of another country to help reduce poverty and achieve sustainable development

Aid = ODA

Types of AID:
Bilateral aid

Multilateral aid


Tied aid




Un target for ODA


Development Aid outside governments

80-85% of global development aid comes from governments as official development assistance (ODA) $135 billion total ODA in 2014

Remaining 15-20% comes from private sources: non-governmental organisations (NGOs), foundations, remittances, etc. (E.g. Bill Gates Foundation etc.)


Pros and Cons : AID

PROS
Long term aid for health and education projects builds human capital and stronger social institutions
Project aid can fast forward investment in critical infrastructure projects
Helps to overcome the savings gap
Aid can play a key role in stabilising post conflict environments and in disaster recovery
Well targeted aid might add around 0.5% to growth rate of poorest countries – this benefits donor countries too as trade grows (this effect is contested in the academic community)
CONS
Aid may lead to a distortion of market forces and a loss of economic efficiency and risks of inflation
Aid can finance corruption and can make ruling elites more powerful
Dependency culture
Lack of transparency






Opinions on the topic :
Book - Dead aid
Professor - Paul Collier

“An increase in the aid-to-GDP ratio is associated with a long-run decrease in GDP in almost two-thirds of the countries” Dierk Herzer and Oliver Morrissey (2013)

Four key barriers for aid effectiveness:
Corruption
Religious tension
Size of government
Involvement of military



Angus Deaton on Aid




Challenge when gauging the impact of aid
What period to look at?
Data quality issues
Types of aid
Reverse causality

Multilateral Organizations



Role of the world bank
The World Bank is the world's largest multilateral development agency

• WB provides a wide array of financial products and technical assistance, and helps countries share and apply innovative knowledge and solutions to the challenges they face

• Since 1947, the World Bank has funded over 12,000 development projects, via traditional loans, interest-free credits, and grants


The World Bank Group has set two goals for the world to achieve by 2030:

• End extreme poverty by decreasing the percentage of people living on less than $1.90 a day to no more than 3%
• Promote shared prosperity by fostering income growth of the bottom 40% for every country

Role of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
The IMF basically does three things:

Economic Surveillance
• IMF oversees the international monetary system and monitors the economic and financial policies. It highlights possible risks to stability and advises on needed policy adjustments.

Lending
• Provides loans to member countries experiencing actual or potential balance of payments problems to help them rebuild their international reserves, stabilize their currencies, continue paying for imports, and restore conditions for strong economic growth

Capacity Development
• IMF works with governments around the world to modernize their economic policies and institutions, and train their people


Institutions and trade
What are Institutions?

• Defined as the “humanly devised constraints that shape human interaction” (North 1990).

• Institutions include social norms, laws, regulations, political constitutions and international
treaties (‘rules of the game’).

• Include both formal rules (e.g. laws, property rights) and informal constraints (e.g. taboos,
customs).

ex:


What is International Trade?

• International trade is the exchange of goods and services between countries
• Trading globally gives consumers and countries the opportunity to be exposed to goods
and services not available in their own countries
• The concept of comparative advantage!
• Almost every kind of product can be found on the international market: food, clothes,
spare parts, oil, jewellery, wine, stocks, currencies, water.. etc.
• Services are also traded: tourism, banking, consulting and transportation
• If there is a trade of goods and services, then there will be a money flow; inflow and
outflow

What are the reasons for trade?

1. Difference in resource endowment
• Resource endowments refer to the skills and abilities of a country’s workforce, the natural
resources available within its borders (minerals, farmland, etc.), and the sophistication of
its capital stock (machinery, infrastructure, communications systems)

2. Difference in technology
• Technology refers to the techniques used to turn resources (labor, capital, land) into
outputs (goods and services)

3. Differences in demand
• Canadians and Germans may demand more beer
• Chinese are likely to demand more
